add the kb for bitbucket and jenkins freestyle (#1984)
semgrep/semgrep-docs: docs/kb/semgrep-ci/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-projects.md

---
tags:
  - Bitbucket
  - Jenkins
  - Freestyle projects
description: Set up Jenkins freestyle projects for Bitbucket repositories.
---

> # Set up Jenkins freestyle projects for Bitbucket repositories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Set up Jenkins Freestyle projects for Bitbucket repositories
```

## Requirements

Ensure you have set up [triggering events from Bitbucket to Jenkins](https://semgrep.dev/docs/kb/semgrep-ci/bitbucket-triggering-events-to-jenkins/).

> ## Create a Jenkins freestyle project

Reviewer: need it up above too :)

1. From the **Jenkins Dashboard** click on create a **New Item**.
1. Type a project name and select the **Freestyle project** option. Click **Ok** button.
![Filled-out item name and Freestyle option](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle.png)
1. In the **General** section, add the Bitbucket repository details: repository URL, credentials and main branch.
![Filled-out repository details](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-repository-details.png)

> 1. In the **Build Triggers** section, click the **<i class="fa-solid fa-square-check"></i> Build with Bitbucket Push and Pull Request Plugin**. Alternatively, the plugin can also be called **Bitbucket Cloud Pull Request** or **Bitbucket Server Pull Request**.

Author: Good point. So, there are at least three plugins to work with Jenkins and Bitbucket: [this one](https://github.com/jenkinsci/bitbucket-push-and-pull-request-plugin), [this one](https://github.com/jenkinsci/bitbucket-pullrequest-builder-plugin), and [this one](https://github.com/jenkinsci/stash-pullrequest-builder-plugin). We recommend the first one as explained in our [first kb](https://semgrep.dev/docs/kb/semgrep-ci/bitbucket-triggering-events-to-jenkins) about it.

> 1. In the **Build Triggers** section, click the **<i class="fa-solid fa-square-check"></i> Build with Bitbucket Push and Pull Request Plugin**. Alternatively, the plugin can also be called **Bitbucket Cloud Pull Request** or **Bitbucket Server Pull Request**.

Reviewer 2: Since we recommended the first one in the KB we set as a requirement, WDYT about removing mentions of the other two? I think it might be less confusing that way

1. In **Triggers > Select an Action** select **Created**, **Updated** and **Push**.
![Build triggers for the freestyle project](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-events.png)
1. In the **Build environment** section declare the `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` selecting the option **Use secret text or file.**
![Filled-out the secrets text option](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-token.png)
:::note

> The `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` must be defined as a credential in Jenkins settings.

Reviewer: I'm kinda confused about this actually. What does it refer to? Is it separate from adding the credential in the instruction above?

Reviewer: Right, but if it's defined there, we shouldn't need to set another value for it, should we? The system should know the value from the credential.

Author: You are right. I have adapted the text. Thanks!

:::

## Running full scans 
In the section **Build Steps** add a new **Execute Shell** step with the logic explained in the steps below:
```
docker run \
    -e SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN=$SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN \
    -v "$(pwd):$(pwd)" --workdir $(pwd) \
    semgrep/semgrep semgrep ci
```
Now, after a push to the main branch a new Semgrep full scan runs.

> ## Running pull requests scans (diff scans)

Author: Done!

> For this approach, it is required to set some Environment variables that you would typically see natively in Bitbucket but not on the Jenkins side. For Semgrep to integrate natively, the following environment variables are needed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this approach, you must set environment variables that you would see natively in Bitbucket, but not in Jenkins. For Semgrep to integrate natively, the following environment variables are needed:
```

Reviewer: I think "natively" isn't appropriate in the second sentence either. We're not in Bitbucket, and Semgrep isn't native to Bitbucket or Jenkins.

Author: I moved `SEMGREP_REPO_URL` and `SEMGREP_REPO_NAME` to full scans as they are needed for full scans too!

> SEMGREP_REPO_URL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SEMGREP_REPO_URL`
```

Author: Done!

> SEMGREP_REPO_NAME

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SEMGREP_REPO_NAME`
```

> SEMGREP_BRANCH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SEMGREP_BRANCH`
```

> SEMGREP_PR_ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SEMGREP_PR_ID`
```

> SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF`
```

> So a final shell script could like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One possible version of the shell script is:
```

```
#!/bin/bash

BASELINE_REF="main"
BASELINE_REF_ORIGIN="origin/$BASELINE_REF" 

REPO_URL=$GIT_URL
REPO_NAME=$(echo "$GIT_URL" | awk -F'/' '{print $(NF-1)"/"$(NF)}' | sed 's/.git$//')

## Merge or push to primary branch
if [ $BITBUCKET_SOURCE_BRANCH = $BASELINE_REF ]; then
    docker run -e SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN=$SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN \
               -e SEMGREP_REPO_URL=$REPO_URL \
               -e SEMGREP_REPO_NAME=$REPO_NAME \
               -v "$(pwd):$(pwd)" --workdir $(pwd) \
               semgrep/semgrep semgrep ci
 ## pull request scans
 elif [ $BITBUCKET_PULL_REQUEST_ID -ge 0 ]; then
    git checkout $BITBUCKET_SOURCE_BRANCH && git pull
    docker run -e SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN=$SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN \
    		   -e SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF=$BASELINE_REF_ORIGIN \
               -e SEMGREP_REPO_URL=$REPO_URL \
               -e SEMGREP_REPO_NAME=$REPO_NAME \
               -e SEMGREP_BRANCH=$BITBUCKET_SOURCE_BRANCH \
               -e SEMGREP_PR_ID=$BITBUCKET_PULL_REQUEST_ID \
               -v "$(pwd):/src" \
               semgrep/semgrep semgrep ci
fi 
```

:::note

> - The variable SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF must be set to the main branch, in the example: `main`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The variable `SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF` must be set to the main branch, which, in the example, is `main`.
```

Reviewer: We probably shouldn't use main here meaning both the default/primary branch and the actual branch called main. I'd personally go for "The variable `SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF` must be set to the default or trunk branch"

1. From the Jenkins **Dashboard**, click **New Item**.
1. Type a project name and select **Freestyle project**. Click **OK**.
![Filled-out item name and Freestyle option](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle.png)
1. On the **General** page, go to the **Source Code Management** section. Select **Git**. Add your Bitbucket **Repository URL**, select the **Credentials** needed to check out sources, and select the **Branches to build**.
![Filled-out repository details](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-repository-details.png)
1. In the **Build Triggers** section, click **<i class="fa-solid fa-square-check"></i> Build with Bitbucket Push and Pull Request Plugin**. 
1. In **Triggers > Select an Action** select **Created**, **Updated**, and **Push**.
![Build triggers for the freestyle project](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-events.png)
1. In the **Build environment** section, declare the `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` by selecting **Use secret text or file.** Set **Variable** to `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` and **Credentials > Specific credentials** to your token value. Click **Add** to save your changes.
![Filled-out the secrets text option](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-token.png)
:::note

> The `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` must be defined as a credential in Jenkins settings.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like

```suggestion
Ensure that you have [defined `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` as a credential](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/using/using-credentials/#configuring-credentials) in Jenkins.
```

?

Author: Yes!

1. In **Triggers > Select an Action** select **Created**, **Updated**, and **Push**.
![Build triggers for the freestyle project](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-events.png)
1. In the **Build environment** section, declare the `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` by selecting **Use secret text or file.** Set **Variable** to `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` and **Credentials > Specific credentials** to your token value. Click **Add** to save your changes.
![Filled-out the secrets text option](/img/kb/bitbucket-jenkins-freestyle-token.png)
:::note
Ensure that you have [defined `SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN` as a credential](https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/using/using-credentials/#configuring-credentials) in Jenkins.
:::

## Run full scans 
In the **Build Steps** section, add an **Execute Shell** step with the logic below:
```
#!/bin/bash

REPO_URL=$GIT_URL
REPO_NAME=$(echo "$GIT_URL" | awk -F'/' '{print $(NF-1)"/"$(NF)}' | sed 's/.git$//')

docker run \
    -e SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN=$SEMGREP_APP_TOKEN \
    -e SEMGREP_REPO_URL=$REPO_URL \
    -e SEMGREP_REPO_NAME=$REPO_NAME \
    -v "$(pwd):$(pwd)" --workdir $(pwd) \
    semgrep/semgrep semgrep ci
```

> :::note
> - The variable `SEMGREP_REPO_URL` is helpful to link the Semgrep findings with the repository.
> :::
> 
> :::note
> - Setting the variable `SEMGREP_REPO_NAME` is a good practice as it allows to specify an accurate name to the Semgrep project.
> :::
> 
> 
> Now, a full scan runs when you push changes to the main branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
- The variable `SEMGREP_REPO_URL` links the Semgrep project and findings with the Bitbucket repository.
- The variable `SEMGREP_REPO_NAME` provides an accurate and meaningful name to the Semgrep project.
:::

After adding the script, a full scan runs when you push changes to the main branch.
```

> ## Running pull requests scans (diff-aware scans)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run scans on pull requests (diff-aware scans)
```

> The diff-aware scan configuration uses a computed merge base. To achieve that it is needed to specify the source branch: `SEMGREP_BRANCH` and the target branch: `SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF`. In addition, setting the `SEMGREP_REPO_NAME` and `SEMGREP_PR_ID` allows Semgrep to identify the connected project and related PR.

Reviewer: Actually, this diff-aware scan config doesn't use a computed merge base. It would be better if it did, but it might require further modifications to the script (I'm not exactly sure how deep the BB checkout is). If we retain the current script, this should look more like:

```suggestion
The diff-aware scan configuration must specify a merge base to compare the PR changes against. To achieve that, specify the pull request target branch as `SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF`, and set `SEMGREP_BRANCH` to the pull request source branch to ensure it's correctly identified. Set the `SEMGREP_REPO_NAME` as described above for full scans, and add `SEMGREP_PR_ID` so Semgrep can send comments to the related PR.
```

> Said that, one possible version of the shell script is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One possible way to modify the shell script to include diff-aware scans is:
```

```

:::note

> - The variable `SEMGREP_BASELINE_REF` must be set to the main branch, which, in the example, is `main`.

Reviewer: Is there a way in the BB/Jenkins set up to set it to the PR target branch instead of always the main branch? This also affects my feedback above; if there isn't, we should just say up there to set it to the default or trunk branch, which in the example is `main`.

Author: Change to default branch so far.
